---
title: 'Editors Weekly: What Is Plain Language? Part 1; A Definition'
date: 23-08-2021
published: true
visible: false
summary:
    enabled: true
    format: short
    size: 128
taxonomy:
    category: [Repubs]
    tag: [editing, plain language]
author: aaron
metadata:
    author: aaron

---

**This article was [originally published on *The Editors' Weekly*](http://blog.editors.ca/?p=9484), the official blog of the [Editors' Association of Canada](http://editors.ca).**

===

## What Is Plain Language? Part 1: A Definition

This is the first in a series of articles discussing the basic principles of
plain language that I’ve found successful in my teaching. These principles may
not be new to my fellow editors. Perhaps some material here will be useful in
your own educational efforts.

My experience is with non-fiction, mostly technical, writing. I would love to
hear in the comments how these principles might apply to fiction writing. I did
find [one article on plain language in speculative
fiction](https://litreactor.com/columns/using-plain-language-in-speculative-fiction) that
I thought was lovely.

### Defining plain language

The definition I use in my workshops comes
from [PlainLanguage.gov](https://www.plainlanguage.gov/about/definitions/) (emphasis
added):

> Plain language … is communication your audience can understand *the first time* they read or hear it.…
>
> Language that is plain to one set of readers may not be plain to others. Material is in plain language if your audience can:
>
> - Find what they need
> - Understand what they find *the first time* they read or hear it
> - Use what they find to meet their needs

I love this definition because it focuses on the outcome instead of prescribing
specific actions. (The group working on the ISO standard for plain language is
working with [a similar
definition](https://www.iplfederation.org/plain-language/)). This gives authors
and editors flexibility in how they meet the outcome. It also recognizes the
centrality of audience. It doesn’t rule anything out. If you are indeed writing
something for a very narrow specialist audience (e.g., a journal article
intended for other people with graduate degrees in the subject), then jargon and
established genre norms are not only acceptable, they may be essential. But as
your audience broadens, the effort required to make your document more easily
digestible increases.

### Helping readers understand

The reality is that you can’t force anyone to read your document. So if you care
about actually communicating something, then it is incumbent upon you, the
writer, to make the document easy to read. Plain language is about shifting the
hard work from the shoulders of your hapless readers to yours, where it
belongs. *You* are the subject-matter expert. *You* know what it is you want to
say. Don’t make your readers try to guess.

Yes, it takes more *effort* to produce a plain language document. But with
practice and planning (the topic of a later article), it doesn’t have to take
much more *time*. And any additional time you invest usually pays off in the
long run by staving off customer support calls and lengthy explanatory email
exchanges.

### Balancing accuracy with precision

But just as important as what plain language *is* is what it is *not*. If
there’s one phrase I hate, it’s “dumbing down.” It degrades your readers. They
are not dumb; they’re just busy. And you making efforts to meet them where they
are should be an act of kindness, not condescension. Some people complain that
plain language is imprecise. This isn’t necessarily true. You must simply
balance accuracy with precision. I think of plain language writing as an act of
translation. It’s true that English doesn’t have an exact equivalent to the
German word *schadenfreude*, but that doesn’t mean you can’t convey the same
meaning. It just means it will take more words.

At its core, plain language is about empathy. It’s about getting out of your own
head, thinking about who you’re trying to reach and what you’re trying to say,
and then making it as easy as possible for your audience to understand you.

How do you use the term “plain language”? How do you apply this principle in
your work?
