---
title: 'Editors Weekly: Laws of UX'
date: 11-08-2020
published: true
visible: false
summary:
    enabled: true
    format: short
    size: 128
taxonomy:
    category: [Repubs]
    tag: [editing, IT, UX, UI, user experience]
author: aaron
metadata:
    author: aaron

---

**This article was [originally published on *The Editors' Weekly*](https://blog.editors.ca/?p=6858), the official blog of the [Editors' Association of Canada](http://editors.ca).**

===

UX stands for “user experience.” It’s the discipline that looks at how users
navigate (usually digital) interfaces and tries to maximize fluency.

In-house editors will often find themselves wearing many hats, especially in
smaller organizations. I know I’ve often been asked to edit not just web copy
but also text in various IT systems (for example, reports in
[Tableau](https://www.tableau.com/) or “help” text in a map viewer). In my role
as advocate for the reader, I try to look at the entire environment the text is
being presented in and not just the text itself.

Most professional editors have neither the time nor the inclination to become
expert user experience designers, but here are a few basic principles (drawn
from front-end designer [Jon Yablonski](https://jonyablonski.com/)’s [Laws of
UX](https://lawsofux.com/)), that could make your review of such text even more
valuable.

## Fitts’s Law

“The time to acquire a target is a function of the distance to and size of the
target.”

This means that items (such as buttons) that you want users to click on should
be large and close to the user. If a user needs to click a series of buttons,
the buttons should be close to each other to decrease the mouse movement.

## Hick’s Law

“The time it takes to make a decision increases with the number and complexity
of choices.”

At the design level, minimize the number of choices overall. If the process is
complex, consider breaking it into smaller steps. For example, a decision-tree
approach lets the user make one simple choice at a time, which culminates in a
final result. Make it easy to select recommended options, or put rarely needed
options on a separate page.

## Jakob’s Law

“Users spend most of their time on other sites. This means that users prefer
your site to work the same way as all the other sites they already know.”

Even if you’re not a professional UX designer, you’re probably a
professional-level consumer of computer systems. Trust your gut. If in your
review you come across workflows or patterns that seem to be contrary to how
others do things, query it.

## Laws of Common Region, Proximity and Uniform Connectedness

These three laws are closely correlated:

-   “Elements tend to be perceived [as] groups if they are sharing an area with
    a clearly defined boundary.”

-   “Objects that are near … to each other tend to be grouped together.”

-   “Elements that are visually connected are perceived as more related than
    elements with no connection.”

When looking at a user interface, be aware of what your eye — or the user’s eye
— automatically groups together.

## Law of Similarity

“The human eye tends to perceive similar elements in a design as a complete
picture, shape or group, even if those elements are separated.”

The most common examples of this are hyperlinks and navigation systems. They
should be visually differentiated from normal text elements and be consistently
styled so the user can recognize them anywhere.

## Von Restorff Effect

Also known as the “isolation effect,” this law “predicts that when multiple
similar objects are present, the one that differs from the rest is most likely
to be remembered.”

Use visual distinctiveness to guide users and make it clear what you think is
important.

These “laws” are based on well-established ideas from psychology (such as
[Gestalt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gestalt_psychology)), and Yablonski’s
site is but the tip of the iceberg. There is no shortage of decent primers out
there if you search for terms like “ux primer” or “ux for beginners.”

Do you have any UX lessons or resources you’d like to share?
