---
title: 'Editors Weekly: Learning From History'
date: 2020-10-06
categories:  [Repubs]
tags:  [editing, style guides, case studies]
author: aaron
---

**This article was [originally published on *The Editors' Weekly*](https://blog.editors.ca/?p=7022), the official blog of the [Editors' Association of Canada](http://editors.ca).**

<!--more-->

*This post is part of a series of case studies by and for in-house editors. The
focus of this series is on the personal experiences and various roles of
in-house editors. If you’re interested in writing a post for this series, please
email the* [*Member Services
Committee.*](mailto:membership_services_chair@editors.ca)

One of the reasons our species has flourished is that we are, for the most part,
very good at learning from the successes and failures of others. From oral
traditions still practised today to the ubiquitous internet, we learn by
examining the stories of others — "standing on the shoulders of giants," as the
saying goes.

When faced with an editorial challenge not easily solved by "[the orange
bible](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/home.html)," most of us turn to our
favourite search engine. There, we often find others’ stories in the form of
articles and forum posts to answer our questions. But sometimes the search terms
are too generic, or the results we want are drowned out by a similar term in a
different discipline, or maybe there just isn’t a single right answer. Sometimes
we need to hear stories from people we know are in the same boat as us. Which
brings us to Editors Canada’s recently announced [resources for in-house editors
— specifically the style guide case
studies](https://www.editors.ca/members/services/resources-house-editors)
(requires member login).

## In-house style guides

One project in-house editors usually deal with is a house style guide. Creating
one is a non-trivial undertaking. Maintaining one takes real effort. Helping
writers adhere to it … that’s a different article altogether. Where do you
start? What should you do?

Searching for terms like "style guide examples" or "how do I create a style
guide" brings up more noise than signal. You quickly discover that most results
either point you to well-established style guides like *The Chicago Manual of
Style* and the style guide of the American Psychological Association (APA), or
are focused more on visual brand elements (important, but not sufficient).
Others are so elaborate they require a Fortune 500 budget to create. And none of
them mention maintenance and promotion.

## Lessons from case studies

But obviously companies across the country have style guides. If only you knew
someone personally that could tell you about what their company does. If only
you had access to a host of people in different corporate environments with many
different perspectives on making a style guide work. Well, it turns out, roughly
18 per cent of Editors Canada members identify as in-house editors, according to
a 2016 survey of members! There are many dozens of stories out there waiting to
be told — lessons ready to be learned!

The goal of the Editors Canada style guide case studies is to create a central
place for editors on the member website to share their stories about style
guides in the workplace. What worked? More importantly, what didn’t? What did it
contain? How did you promote it? The idea is to facilitate an exchange of
information that can be beneficial to everyone.

So, here’s the call to action: do you have experience working with an in-house
style guide? Consider writing up your experiences for the community. It doesn’t
have to be long. It doesn’t have to be comprehensive. But such a collection of
stories will hopefully form the shoulders others can stand on, elevating the
practice of creating and maintaining style guides as a whole.

Have you seen case studies work in other contexts before? Do you have any ideas
for other topics that could benefit from this approach? Tell us in the comments
below!
