---
title: 'Editors Weekly: What Is Plain Language? Part 2; Reading is a Skill'
date: 31-08-2021
published: true
visible: false
summary:
    enabled: true
    format: short
    size: 128
taxonomy:
    category: [Repubs]
    tag: [editing, plain language]
author: aaron
metadata:
    author: aaron

---

**This article was [originally published on *The Editors' Weekly*](http://blog.editors.ca/?p=9572), the official blog of the [Editors' Association of Canada](http://editors.ca).**

===

## What Is Plain Language? Part 2: Reading is a Skill

**This is the second in [a series of articles discussing the basic principles of
plain language](https://blog.editors.ca/?tag=plain-language) by Aaron Dalton.**

### Defining literacy

Literacy is not just about being able to read and write; it’s also about being
able to understand and use what you read. In [an earlier blog
post](http://blog.editors.ca/?p=6136), I mentioned a standardized measure
called [the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
(PIAAC)](https://www.oecd.org/skills/piaac/), developed by [the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)](https://www.oecd.org/).

The OECD defines the PIAAC assessment of literacy as “the ability to understand
and use information from written texts in a variety of contexts to achieve goals
and develop knowledge and potential.” They define five levels of literacy that
encompass skills ranging from finding specific information in a short,
well-structured document to searching for information across multiple dense
texts and evaluating the reliability of evidentiary sources. “Low literacy” is
defined as level two or lower. *Half* of Canadian adults fell into this
category.

### Understanding literacy statistics

We all understand that reading itself is a learned skill, but so is reading
critically, evaluating evidence and synthesizing information across multiple
documents. These are skills that many people hone in university. As with skills
like playing a musical instrument, our ability to do these things is rarely
constrained by intelligence or general capability (learning disabilities aside);
it’s more usually restricted by opportunity. The reason I focus on literacy
statistics in my workshops is to try to counter [the “curse of
knowledge”](http://blog.editors.ca/?p=6502) that creeps into professional
organizations.

Where I work now, I’d wager that most people have at least a bachelor’s degree,
and a large percentage have master’s degrees. But according to the 2016 census,
45 per cent of Alberta’s adults have *no* post-secondary education whatsoever.
So while our writers have had many years of experience engaging with complex and
challenging texts, most of our readers have not. (And whenever someone tells me
a document *is* for a university graduate, I show them the finding that one in
four university graduates in Canada demonstrated low literacy.)

Or consider that English is a foreign language to one in four adults in Alberta.
If you want to feel what it must be like to be truly illiterate in a given
language, try picking up a document in a language you barely know (another
perfect example of how inability is tied more to opportunity than to inherent
capability). I learned French as a young adult and Italian as an older one, and
in my graduate program I had to work with academic texts in both languages. I
understand viscerally how much extra energy and effort it can take to grapple
with and retain meaning from documents in a non-native language, even one you’re
relatively fluent in.

### Writing with empathy

Reading complex documents is difficult no matter what. It is even harder for
those who have not had much practice doing so. And it’s made harder still if the
document is not drafted with empathy. I believe my job as an editor is to act as
proxy for these readers and help the writers I work with see that you can indeed
convey challenging material in ways more people can understand.
